---
layout: post
title:  "libtins v4.0 release"
---

# libtins v4.0 release

[_libtins_](https://libtins.github.io/) is a high-level, multiplatform C++ network packet sniffing
and crafting library. In this post I'll be covering the major changes that were made in the
_v4.0_ release of the library.

This was a major release that fixed several features that either were wrong or could have been
implemented in a better way. These changes led to considerable performance improvements on several
protocol's parsing code, making _libtins_ slightly faster than it already was.

This version broke the _ABI_ compatibility, which means you should rebuild your project when
updating your _libtins_ reference. The _API_, on the other hand, wasn't broken except on a couple
of spots which hopefully won't affect anyone.

In the following sections we'll look into what was changed and the reasoning behind those changes.

# Performance improvements

One of the changes that I'm most happy about in this release are the ones that led to performance
gains. Several small changes provided a considerable speed improvement when parsing packets.

The changes that were made and helped achieve this were the following:

## Ban `std::list` as the storage for options

Up until this  versiom, `std::list` was used to store options in _PDUs_ like _TCP_,
_IP_ and _DNS_. This container has now been replaced with `std::vector`, which proved to make
parsing those protocols considerably faster. I'm not completely sure why `std::list` was used
initially as it's normally a poor choice of a container except for very specific cases. When there
are options to be parsed, inserting elements into a `std::vector` outperforms `std::list` as it
doesn't need to allocate memory every time a new option is added.

The [TCP + options](http://libtins.github.io/benchmark/#bench2) benchmarks is a good test case
for this. When comparing the latest version to the previous release, I noticed the former performs
about 25% faster than the previous one.

Note that this _shouldn't_ break your code unless you were explicitly doing something like:

{% highlight cpp %}

const TCP tcp = ...;

// Ooops, this will fail
const list<TCP::option>& oops_options = tcp.options();

{% endhighlight %}

But this is easily fixable by using `TCP::options_type`:

{% highlight cpp %}

// Fixed!
const TCP::options_type& yay_options = tcp.options();

{% endhighlight %}

## Total option size tracking

The total option size tracking in _IP_ and _TCP_ was completely removed and now both the size and
required amount of padding are only calculated when serializing a packet. These were basically
wasting space and CPU time as there is really no reason for themn to be pre-calculated. Given
that there's only at most a handful of options in every packet, it's really not worth the
"optimization".

The [TCP](http://libtins.github.io/benchmark/#bench1) benchmark performed about 13% better when
using the latest version. This should be all attributed to this removal as there's nothing
else that was changed that could have caused a performance improvement.

# PDU, I am your parent 

Another change that was introduced is the notion of a parent for every _PDU_. So far there
was only a notion of the "next" layer in a packet but there was no way to get the previous one in
case it existed. This was okay for the most part except on some cases when while serializing a
packet, a layer eeds to know what its parent is in order to compute some value. An example of
this is _TCP_, which uses the packet's _IPv4_/_IPv6_ addresses while computing its checksum.

As a consequence of this, a pointer to the parent _PDU_ was being passed along while serializing
a packet which made for a weird _API_. Now there's no need to have that argument as each _PDU_
knows at all times what its parent is. Note that this probably added a slight performance penalty
due to the fact that the base size for every _PDU_ is now 8 bytes (in x64) larger but it is
probably negligible compared to the other optimization improvements performed.

After adding this I figured it wouldn't be a bad idea to implement a `PDUIterator` class that
represents a bidirectional iterator over every `PDU` present in a packet. This makes it slightly
easier to go through each of them without having to deal with pointers at all:

{% highlight cpp %}

const PDU packet = ...;

// Let's iterate all PDUs in this packet
for (const PDU& pdu : iterate_pdus(packet)) {
    // Print the type of this PDU as a string
    cout << Tins::Utils::to_string(pdu.pdu_type()) << "\n";
}

{% endhighlight %}

# Compilation time improvements

A significant amount of effort was put into making _libtins_ build faster, both while building 
library itself and any application that uses it.

In order to achieve this, some headers like `internals.h` and `utils.h` were split into
multiple files. These had started just containing a couple of functions and classes but grew
too much over time and ended up having a considerable amount of code and pulling in several
header files.

Comparing version _4.0_ with the previous one, _3.5_, I can see the latest one builds 17% faster
in my local machine. This number is fairly relative but any user of the library should see
some sort of build time improvement when building their project. 

# RadioTap parsing/serializing

The parsing and serializing of _RadioTap_ was initially implemented in a really awful way. The
[format](http://www.radiotap.org/#detail) of his protocol is tricky, which makes it non-trivial
to parse. The initial approach involved basically hardcoding the parsing and storing of every
individual field, keeping every one of them on a separate member using the storage type for them.
This meant that every time the parsing of a new field was added, it would break the _ABI_ as the
member in which the field was stored would be added on demand.

In version _4.0_ this was re-written from scratch using a generic parser (`RadioTapParser`)
and writer (`RadioTapWriter`). The entire portion of the `RadioTap` header that contains the
options is stored in a `std::vector` and only parsed on demand. This means that if you don't care
about using `RadioTap` options at all then you won't be paying for the price to parse them. 

This also allows iterating and processing every option in an easy way:

{% highlight cpp %}

RadioTap radio = ...;

// Construct a parser around the buffer where the options are stored
RadioTapParser parser(radio.options_payload());

// Now iterate through all fields
while (parser.has_fields()) {
    cout << "Option type: " << static_cast<int>(parser.current_field()) << "\n";

    // Fetch the current option
    const RadioTap::option option = parser.current_option();

    // Now we can convert this option to the right type
    // using RadioTap::option::to<T>, which will obviously
    // will depend on the type of option it is

    // Advance to the next field
    parser.advance_field();
}

{% endhighlight %}

Note that as a consequence of the current design, it is pretty inefficient to fetch
fields individually as each of them will involve an `O(N)` search over the entire options buffer.
If you need to fetch multiple fields, just iterate through the payload like shown above and
process them.

# Removing HWAddress storage template parameter

`HWAddress` had a second template parameter (besides the one used to store the length of the
address) that indicated which storage type to use for each element stored (defaulting to
`uint8_t`). This is not really useful as I've yet to found a case where I'd like to store a hardware
address where each element is larger than a byte. This was also requiring to include some
"heavy" headers in `hwaddress.h` which slowed down compilation times considerably for any
translation unit that included it.

This template parameter has now been removed and the storage is always `uint8_t`. This will break
your code if you were forward declaring the class. If this is the case, I'm sorry but that had
to go away for good.
